Executive summary
1.    Introduction
Most experts agree that, if the present trends continue,
the concentration of atmospheric CO2 will have
doubled by the year 2050. This increase will have an
important effect on the world's climate, with a marked
rise in temperature globally. Much of England would
experience a climate similar to the present climate of
southwest France.
2.    The sea level change scenario
It is predicted that this global warming will cause large
rises in sea level. There have been several forecasts of
sea level rises of at least one metre in the next hundred
years and there have been predictions of rises of as
great as 4 m. This report considers the biological
implications of sea level rises of 0.8 m up to 1.65 m in
100 years.
3.    Changes in sea defence and coast protection
It has been estimated that the improvement of existing
sea defences to withstand such a rise in sea level would
cost at least 5,000,000,000. Various options for sea
defence and coastal protection would have to be
considered, including raising the existing sea walls,
building new walls further inland, building storm surge
barriers, building major estuarine barrages, and even
abandoning whole sections of coast.
4.    Changes on soft coasts with sea walls
The greatest impact of such a rise in sea level would be
on soft coasts protected by sea walls. As the sea rises,
erosive processes would become dominant and there
would be considerable losses, especially of fine
sediments, although there would be partial re
deposition in sheltered areas. The slope of the shore
would become steeper and each zone narrower. The
sea wall would have to withstand increased erosive
forces following the loss of the salt marshes, mud flats
and sandy beaches to seawards.
It is estimated for Essex, for example, that a sea level
rise of 0.8 m could lead to the loss of the present upper
marsh by reversion to lower marsh and a reduction of at
least 20% in the area of mud flats; any rise greater than
about one metre could lead to a near total loss of marsh
and a reduction of 3050% in the area of mud flats.
The invertebrate fauna of the intertidal flats would
become poorer and less diverse, except locally in fine
sediments. The productivity of the surviving species
would be reduced by the high loads of suspended
sediments in the inshore waters. These changes would
greatly reduce the large numbers of the many species
of birds that roost, feed or breed in the area. At present,
British estuaries are the wintering ground for more than
one half of Europe's waders. Salt marshes provide the
breeding habitat for a number of species  60% of
British redshank nest in the salt marshes.
5.    New sea walls further inland
If new sea walls were to be built further inland, there
should be a partial regeneration of existing habitats, but
this would involve the loss of agricultural land as well as
some'habitats of conservation interest inside the sea
wall. This regeneration of habitats would require that
sea wails be relocated a substantial distance landwards
for there to be a full replacement of lost habitats.
6.    Storm surge barriers
A partial (storm surge) barrier would increase sedimen
tation inside the barrier, which would tend to favour the
growth of salt marsh at the expense of mud flats. The
intertidal invertebrates would remain for a while before
the habitat was lost to salt marsh or by the drying out of
the surface. The number of birds able to use the area
would be reduced because of a loss of food resources
within the mud flats.
7.    Tidal barrages
An impermeable barrier excluding the sea completely
would cause the total loss of the existing fauna and
flora. A range of new fresh water habitats, open water,
marsh and grassland would develop.
8.    Effects on other coastal habitats
There would, also be considerable changes in most
other coastal areas, affecting sand dunes, shingle
banks and earth cliffs. Unless unrestrained landward
movement was possible, increased erosion would
cause extensive losses. Changes inland would include
increased flooding both by the sea and by fresh water,
and considerable extra penetration of salt water directly
up the rivers and indirectly through the groundwater.
9.    Socioeconomic implications
It is ironic that many of the existing holiday beaches
would disappear just as the climate was becoming
similar to that of presentday Biarritz. Recreational
pressure would thus increase on the limited areas still
available.
10.    Strategy for action
Coastal resources and coastal processes are still only
partly understood, especially in relation to the changes
that rising sea levels would cause. We cannot plan
effectively for the conservation and management of our
coastal resources without further research on several
key points. Action is necessary to reconcile the conflic
ting demands on our threatened coastal resources.
Introduction
One of the more dramatic consequences that can be
expected from a global warming is a rise in mean sea
level. The consensus of opinion is that, over the past
century, mean sea level has risen by some 1015 cm
(Robin 1986), although in many parts of the world this
rise is obscured by vertical land movements (Pirazzoli
1986). The rising temperatures affect the sea level in
several different ways; these include the direct thermal
expansion of the oceans, the melting of glacier ice, and
the melting of polar ice sheets. Only the firstmentioned
process, the thermal expansion of the oceans, has been
modelled effectively, but opinions differ as to the
relative significance of the various processes contribut
ing to the sea level rise.
The net result is a wide variation in the forecasts of sea
level changes over the next century or so. Estimates
vary from 0.5 m up to an extreme of 3.5 m (Hoffman
1984). A recent Dutch study postulates a probable rise
of 1 m in the next 100 years and a possible rise of 5 m in
200 years (Anon 1986). Similar or even higher predic
tions have also been made for this country (a rise of up
to 4.5 m in less than 50 years has been predicted for the
Wash 1 Shennan, pers. comm.). Something approach
ing a consensus view is provided by Robin (1986), with
a middle estimate of 0.80 m and a maximum of 1.65 m.
These figures will be taken as the core scenario for the
purposes of this publication.
The general eustatic rise in sea level is not the whole
story. In Britain, the areas of coast most susceptible to
rises in sea level lie in the southeast of the island, just
the areas that are sinking relative to the sea as a result
of isostatic adjustment. Estimates of this process vary,
but they could be in the order of 3 mm per year (Butler
1978). Second, climatic changes themselves would
have a direct effect on at least some of the species,
communities and ecosystems on the coast. Finally, a
recent report has suggested that the northeast Atlantic
has become notably rougher over the past 25 years
(Carter & Draper 1988), which would significantly
increase the impact of a rise in sea level, especially on
exposed coasts.
Sea level is not a constant factor but is subject to
complex cyclic (tidal) and noncyclic fluctuations (eg
changes due to variations in barometric pressure,
changes due to wind, ie storm surges, etc). The
changes in tidal range (difference in level between
mean high water spring tides and mean low water
spring tides) around Britain vary from as little as 2 m in
open water and along the east Norfolk coast up to 11 m
and more in semienclosed areas such as the Severn
estuary. The range increases up the estuary to a
maximum, after which the tidal influence progressively
decreases, although some effects can still be detected
at very considerable distances from the sea.
The effect of a rise in sea level on tidal regimes is not a
simple one, as the various components that make up
the tide are affected differently. While a first approxi
mation can be made by simply adding the sea level rise,
as a constant, to the tidal curves, recent studies in the
Bay of Bengal (Flather & Khandker 1987) have shown
the need for model studies to define the changes
accurately. The studies showed that both tidal
amplitude and storm surges could be increased and
decreased at different points in an estuary following a
rise in sea level. The magnitude was relatively small, but
by no means insignificant (tidal amplitude +6% to
8%, tide + surge elevation +12% to 25%).
However, these results are from a preliminary study of
one particular site and can only be taken as indicating
the need for detailed studies of specific cases.
A factor omitted in the Bengal study was the influence
of river flow. The core scenario for this study includes
the possibility of an increase in rainfall of 20%. Such an
increase could clearly have some effect on river
discharge which, if coincident with tidal or surge
flooding, could be important.
The coastline of Britain can be subdivided into two
categories, the mainly lowlying soft coasts, often
protected by a sea wall, and the harder, predominantly
cliff, coasts. The cliff coasts associated with harder
rocks in the north and west would be little affected,
even with a sea level rise of some magnitude, although
there are sheltered inlets with salt marsh, shingle and
sand dune communities. However, in the absence of
artificial restraints, these isolated communities and
ecosystems would probably adjust to rising sea levels
by slowly migrating landwards. Difficulties could arise if
these natural changes came into conflict with man
made structures or agricultural activities. This report
concentrates on the effects of sea level rise on the soft
coast, both the large areas of soft coast in the south
east and elsewhere and on the small, more or less
isolated, areas of soft coast that occur all round the
British Isles.
A rise in sea level would result in increased erosion, but
such erosion can usually release enough sediments
into circulation to allow the coast to reform more or less
unchanged, the classic 'sea level transgression'. These
processes are illustrated by the barrier island coasts
found in north Norfolk, or, especially, the north of the
Netherlands and north Germany. The development of
new marshes and mud flats is, however, a slow
process, and it is possible that the rate of sea level rise
might be too great for these natural processes of
recovery to take place. In addition, these processes
depend on there being no artificial barriers to limit the
advance of the sea landwards.
Along nearly all of the lowlying coasts of Britain this
transgression process is inhibited by the existence of
sea walls that protect life and property against any
intrusion of the sea. A rise in sea level would increase
the rate of erosion of marshes seawards of the sea wall,
and the sediment would generally be lost from the
immediate system. However, most of the sea walls are
composed of erodable material and are lightly protected
against erosion. They are generally only high enough to
give protection against present sea levels. A sea level
rise of the magnitude postulated would require a major
review of sea defence and coast protection policies.
The effect of sea level rise on coastal ecosystems
would thus depend considerably on the choice of
options for sea defence (Section 3) and their impli
cations (Section 4). Only then can consideration be
given to the effect of sea level rise on the vegetation of
mud flats and salt marshes (Section 5), on the popu
lations of the invertebrates of the mud flats (Section 6),
and on the bird populations associated with these
habitats (Section 7).
Some parts of these lowlying coasts are fronted and
protected by sand dunes or shingle banks. These areas
would also be vulnerable to change as a result of a rise
in sea level, especially where there is insufficient space
for them to reform landwards (Section 8).
Sea level rise would also present a significant problem,
however, in those areas with a cliff coast where the
cliffs are composed of softer rocks, such as the 'earth'
cliffs of north Humberside and parts of Norfolk and
Suffolk (Section 9). The present, not inconsiderable,
rates of erosion would be dramatically enhanced. If
erosion was allowed to proceed unchecked, then there
would be a substantial enhancement of the supplies of
sediment to salt marsh and sand dune areas further
along the coast. Conversely, the prevention of
erosion would cut off this supply of sand and sediment
and could result in increased erosion elsewhere.
In addition to the direct effect already mentioned, a rise
in sea level would affect areas some distance inland.
There is likely to be increased flooding in coastal areas
by sea water or brackish water, and salt penetration of
the groundwater would increase further inland (Salinas,
Delaune & Patrick 1986). There would also be a more
marked and more frequent penetration of salt water
upstream, such as occurred in the Norfolk Broads early
in 1988 resulting in the dramatic fish kill. There could
also be effects far inland as a result of new sea defence
strategies (Section 10).
All parts of the coast of the British Isles would be
affected by a rise in sea level of the degree predicted.
The magnitude of these effects would vary greatly on a
regional basis (Section 11).
There are many conflicting demands on our coastal
resources. Sea level rise will thus have considerable
socioeconomic implications (Section 12).
The effects of sea level rise on all coastal ecosystems
are likely to be considerable, and potentially catastro
phic for some of them. Deleterious changes could be
offset to a considerable degree by appropriate manage
ment soundly based on research (Section 13).
Sea level change and sea defence options
In the past, small rises in sea level have been provided
for, and factors of safety against storm surges have
been increased mainly by raising the height of existing
structures, although these actions have been supple
mented by major projects, such as the Thames barrier.
The magnitude of the rises postulated, however, pose
radically different problems. It appears that many
existing sea walls lack the foundations to withstand
raising them by the required amount. Even if such a
measure were possible, it would cost between 2,500
and 3,000 per metre to raise the walls sufficiently to
cope with a rise of 1.65 m (A J Allison, pers. comm.).
This estimate makes no allowance for secondary
climatic effects, such as the deteriorating wave
climate, which could make the situation worse.
In addition to the costs of raising existing sea defences,
there is also the problem of the various outfalls. The
vast majority of gravity outfalls would become inoper
able, and many pumping stations would have to be
modified or replaced at an estimated cost of 2,000 M.
With an estimated total capital cost of 5,000 M for
replacing the sea defences, by conventional means, to
cope with a sea level rise of 1.65 m by the year 2050 (A J
Allison, pers. comm.), some areas might have to be
abandoned and left unprotected because the works
could not be justified from cost benefit considerations,
while other areas might have to be protected in ways
different from today. Major estuaries could be pro
tected with barriers, but generally this would involve
expenditure at least as great as that of raising present
sea walls. An alternative is to abandon some land and
reconstruct the sea wall landwards. The abandoned
land would then form new saltings that would give extra
protection to the sea wall. The wall would thus cost less
to construct than an exposed sea wall but, to this figure,
would have to be added the cost of acquiring the
agricultural land that would be abandoned.
Given the predicted rises in sea level, it seems likely
that the tactical outcome would represent a combin
ation of these various approaches. Certain options may
be inherently more expensive but might have other cost
benefits, eg barrages for sea defence and tidal power.
Environmental consideration will, therefore, be given to
these four distinct options, together with the ultimate
alternative of abandoning the coast:
(a)     Present sea walls raised
(b)     New sea walls constructed landwards of existing
ones
(c)    Storm surge barriers built across estuaries
(d)     Impermeable barriers built across estuaries
(e)    Abandonment of coast
General effects of the various options
4.1  Introduction
The effects would vary depending on whether the
shoreline is primarily open tidal flats or a large estuary,
or whether it is in the form of an estuary well protected
by a narrow entrance. In an open situation, the increase
in water level and higher wave energy would result in
increased erosion and increased sediment instability.
The fine sediments would probably be deposited
elsewhere or offshore and might be lost to the system,
at least locally. The increased wave energy would also
cause the sediments to be reworked, with a removal of
fines and an increase in coarse sediments. The
effective levels of the flats would decrease as a result
of both sea level rise and erosion. In some cases,
underlying harder sediments would be exposed. It is
also possible that the shore profile would become more
concave so that the length of exposure at low tide
would decrease.
The situation would be rather different for a sheltered
estuary or inlet. With the protection from vigorous wave
action, the increase in sediment supply could lead to a
marked increase in accretion, at least locally. On the
flats, fine sediments would continue to predominate.
However, at some stage, sand dunes, sand bars or
shingle banks could be overtopped, resulting in the
mouth of the estuary being widened and protection
decreased. In this case, the erosional trends predicted
for the open shore would also occur in these estuaries
and inlets.
4.2  Present sea walls raised
The rise in water level would result in increased erosion
in all but the most sheltered areas. The shoreline would
become steeper and narrower, and sediments gen
erally coarser. Fine sediments would tend to be lost to
the system, although locally they would move to the
more sheltered areas.
4.3  New sea walls constructed landwards
If the new sea walls were built sufficiently far inland, the
shore would simply migrate landwards and the habitats
would remain much the same as at present. The
distance required would vary greatly. In some cases, it
would be to the start of higher ground. In the case of a
lowlying coast, as in much of Essex, the necessary
distance could only be determined by detailed studies
to find the point at which a new equilibrium would be
reached between the higher sea level and the
increased shelter and increased sediment supply as a
result of moving landwards. In some areas, especially
around the Wash, it would appear that levels inside the
present sea wall are rather too low for this approach to
be effective. If the new sea walls were not constructed
sufficiently far inland, for the full regeneration of
present habitats, the results would be similar to those
detailed in Section 4.1 but less marked.
4.4 Storm surge barriers built across estuaries
Storm surge barriers work by cutting off extreme high
tides. The frequency with which restriction would occur
would depend on the operational policy selected, but, in
general, the overall result would be a reduction in tidal
range and a longer period of slack water at high tide,
which would tend to increase sedimentation, especially
at the higher vegetated levels. The resulting growth of
salt marsh would lead to a narrowing of the width of the
intertidal mud flats, which would tend to be composed
of finer sediments. There would also be an increase in
the silting up of the channels and creeks.
4.5  Impermeable barriers built across estuaries
Such barriers would isolate the area from marine
influences and create fresh water lakes, marshes and
grassland, with a whole range of new nonsaline
habitats, thus bringing about a complete change in the
ecology of the area.
4.6 Abandonment of coast
If all forms of sea defence or coast protection were
abandoned, then the classic 'transgression' would
occur, as already described. Erosion would take place
until a new stability was reached, with sediments
moving inshore and being redeposited. In general,
existing habitats would be reformed and, in.some
cases, even extended in area, with a reversion to the
situation that existed before the sea walls were built. It
would take many years for existing salt marshes and
mud flats to be eroded, and there would, therefore, be a
lag period before a new equilibrium was reached.
Changes in mud flat and salt marsh vegetation
5.1    Distribution of salt marsh vegetation
The vegetation of salt marshes and vegetated mud flats
occurs in distinct zones related to the tidal regime, to
the periods of submersion or emergence that the
component plant species can withstand. Intertidal flats
can have transient communities of algae, even at the
lower levels. Mud flats generally only support vascular
(higher) plants when they are exposed for longer
periods than they are covered by the sea.
Vegetation thus starts at a level rather above mean sea
level. Typically, at the lowest levels, the mud flats only
have scattered stands of seagrass (Zostera spp.j. This
plant is, however, really marine rather than terrestrial,
as many other species of Zostera can grow permanen
tly submerged.
The primary colonizer of the lower flats is usually marsh
samphire (Salicornia sppJ, first as scattered individuals,
then as dense stands. In certain areas, however, the
pioneer species is the alien hybrid cordgrass (Spartina
anglica). Locally, it has come to dominate vast areas,
but recently it has decreased considerably in its extent
and distribution, particularly in the southeast of Britain.
The marshes above the pioneerzone have a lowerzone
dominated by sea aster (Aster tripolium) and marsh
samphire, and an upper zone dominated by a range of
species, including sea meadow grass (Puccinellia mari
tima), sea lavender (Limonium vulgare), and sea pur
slane (Halimione portulacoides), the socalled general
salt marsh (GSM). The lower marsh is covered by every
tide, while the upper GSM is only covered by the higher
spring tides. Between the GSM and the lower marsh,
there is often a distinctive intermediate zone, domi
nated by sea meadow grass and sea purslane.
The GSM itself can usually be divided into an upper and
lower zone, based on the occurrence of species like sea
thrift (Armeria mantima). This upper zone is only
covered by the highest tides. The upper edge of the salt
marsh can be recognized by the occurrence of sea
couchgrass (Elymus pycnanthus) along the line
reached by the highest (equinoctial) spring tides.
This example is a considerable simplification, as many
plant species and plant communities are involved
(Beeftink 1979). The simple examples given above will,
however, serve to demonstrate the principles and
processes.
Each zone can be defined in terms of the tidal regime
that the component plant species can tolerate at critical
stages in their life cycle. In the normal situation, the
surface of the marsh is built up by the accretion of
sediment. The vegetation, by slowing the water flow,
traps the sediment. The plant cover and the plant roots
help to protect the substrate from erosion. As accretion
proceeds and the surface of the marsh builds up, the
first colonizers, more tolerant of submersion but less
vigorously competitive, are progressively replaced, in a
regular sequence of species and communities.
The pioneer stands of marsh samphire are replaced by
low marsh with mixed communities, dominated first by
sea aster and marsh samphire, and then by sea
meadow grass and sea purslane, and ultimately by sea
lavender and the other species of the GSM. If the sea
level rises, however, there is a reversion to an earlier
stage. The sequence of plant communities can then be
repeated. The old marsh is recolonized by pioneer or
early species and communities. This response to rising
sea levels has partly been illustrated by the effects of
the modified tidal regimes created by the Dutch Delta
Works (Beeftink 1979; Groenendijk 1983, 1985). It
must be noted that recovery is slow and there is an
increased risk of erosion.
Salt marsh vegetation is affected directly by sea level
rise by more frequent and longer submersion, and
indirectly through the more severe wave climate that
the marshes would experience because of the deeper
water seawards. It is possible to estimate the direct
effects of sea level rise much more accurately than the
effects of a change in the wave climate and the
associated increase in erosive processes.
Salt marshes are typically dynamic communities main
tained by a balance between erosion and deposition, as
has been shown by studies on the marshes of north
Kent. As some areas of marsh were lost by erosion, the
loss was offset by the growth of new marshes else
where (Kirby 1969). Recently, however, in the Essex
area, there has been a tendency for erosive processes
to become dominant, with extensive losses, especially
of the lower zones of the salt marsh dominated by
marsh samphire and sea aster (Boorman 1987). There
are indications that this situation may also be occurring
in various other parts of the south and southeast of
Britain.
5.2   Changes on open coasts and large estuaries
In addition to the progressive drowning of the zones as
the sea level rises, there would be an increase in the
magnitude of erosive processes. Salt marsh edges
would become cliffed, or existing cliffs would become
more marked. The creek system would become rejuve
nated  and  the  creeks  steeper and  wider,  with  a
corresponding decrease in the area of the marsh
covered by vegetation. Rates of accretion would tend to
remain the same or even to decrease, except locally
where there is some form of shelter, giving a further net
loss of vegetated marsh.
5.3    Changes in narrow protected estuaries
In sheltered estuaries, the effect of the rise in sea level
drowning the lower zone of vegetation would tend to be
ameliorated by the increased availability of fine
sediment, and thus the possibility of increased rates of
sedimentation. It is difficult at present to quantify the
magnitude of such an effect. It seems unlikely that
there would be enough accretion anywhere to offset
the sea level rise completely, except possibly at a very
local scale. The normal upper limit of salt marsh growth,
at around 1020 mm per year, is close to the higher
predicted rate of sea level rise (16.5 mm yf1). However,
the rejuvenated low marsh would generally receive
sufficient sediment to enable some upward growth,
and to allow for the possible regeneration of higher
marsh. Salt marshes are known to act as sinks for
pollutants, and sediment released by marsh erosion,
when redeposited, may well not be favourable for plant
growth. The growth of marsh in such a situation would
inevitably mean a reduction in the extent of mud flats
and a steepening of the lower shore.
5.4    Present sea walls raised
The effect of sea level rise on salt marsh vegetation can
be illustrated by reference to the marshes of Dengie,
Essex. Here, along a 12 km stretch of coast, a system of
marshes and mud flats extends some 2 km seawards.
While there is some variation along the length of the
system, there is sufficient uniformity to define the
zones in terms of mean width. In 1974, the GSM was
390 m wide, amounting to 470 ha; the lower marsh,
dominated by sea aster and marsh samphire, 38 m (46
ha); the sea grass zone 70 m wide (84 ha); and 1570 m
of mud flats (1900 ha). Present widths and areas of
marsh are at least 10% less than those figures (Harms
worth & Long 1986). It must be noted that the
estimates presented here do not include largescale
erosional changes that would also take place.
A sea level rise of 0.8 m would result in the upward
displacement of each zone, with a near complete loss
of the GSM. There would be a tenfold increase in the
lower marsh, to around 500 ha, and a slight decrease in
the seagrass (50 ha). It has already been noted in
Section 5.3 that, at present, the lower marsh communi
ties in the Essex area are experiencing serious dieback
and erosion, so that the stability of the 'secondary'
lower marsh that would be formed cannot be taken for
granted. The lowest areas of the mud flats would be
lost, with very little compensatory gains from the
former seagrass zone. Overall, the area of mud flats
would fall by about 20%, from around 1900 ha to no
more than 1300 ha. This estimate is likely to be the
maximum figure and could be considerably decreased
by the loss of fine sediment.
A sea level rise of 1.0 m is unlikely to have many extra
effects on the marshes, although the extent of
seagrass would probably be reduced to perhaps 40 ha.
There would, however, be a significant decrease in the
width of the mud flats, reducing in area to perhaps 1200
ha, 35% of its present area.
A sea level rise of 1.65 m would have dramatic effects,
as the whole of the present marsh area would be too
low for the growth of marsh vegetation, except for local
fragments of pioneer species. In addition, there would
be a loss of at least 50% of the mud flats. Only the
seagrass might remain, if it was able to reestablish in
its new position. Effectively, the new sea wall would be
very exposed, completely unprotected by salt marshes.
It should be noted that, once the sea level rises much
over about 1 m above its present level, the effects on
the vegetation would become dramatic, with a near
total loss of salt marsh vegetation outside the sea wall.
The exception would be those areas which have a
greatly enhanced tidal range and a correspondingly
wide amplitude in marsh vegetation. Here, the marsh
losses would not be as great as in those areas with a
small tidal range and narrow amplitude in marsh
vegetation.
5.5   New sea walls constructed landwards
The effect of reconstructing the sea walls inland is
much more difficult to quantify, particularly where, as in
parts of Essex, there are areas of reclaimed land,
formerly salt marsh, extending many miles inland.
Certainly, there would be a point at which the present
extent of salt marshes and mud flats could be regener
ated, but it would involve the loss of fairly large areas of
agricultural land. There could also be a significant loss
of land devoted to conservation and amenity purposes.
While the areas of rough grazing marshes of high
biological interest could probably be recreated from
agricultural land, it would involve considerable expense,
both in habitat creation research and in land purchase
and land management.
5.6    Storm surge barriers built across estuaries
The ordinary rise in sea level would have substantially
the same effects as outlined in Section 5.1. The longer
slack period at high water would increase the opportu
nities for sedimentation, with a corresponding increase
in salt marsh growth. It is likely that at least some of the
areas of lower marsh formed from drowned GSM
would build up into new high marsh. This marsh growth
could, however, further decrease the loss of mud flats.
The mud flats themselves would tend to retain fine
sediments, with the increase in shelter.
5.7    Impermeable barriers built across estuaries
A sudden cessation of regular tidal submersions causes
the disappearance of the original vegetation within 15
years (Beeftink 1979). The salt marsh vegetation is then
succeeded by marshes and grassland, the nature of
which is dependent on the grazing management. There
is often a period of years in which weedy species are
dominant, and a range of fresh water communities will
also develop. The principle may have thus been estab
lished, but detailed predictions will naturally depend on
the local situation.
5.8    Abandonment of coast
In the absence of restrictive factors, a full range of plant
communities would be established at an appropriate
distance landwards of their present positions.
However, the present extent of salt marshes in, for
example, Hamford Water, Essex, is at least partly
dependent on sea defence measures, and, while
theoretically transgression would result in the regener
ation of the marshes further landwards, it is not certain
to occur, especially if the higher predictions of sea level
rise are fulfilled. It is distinctly possible that, at least in
the next 50100 years, salt marsh may become restric
ted to a fringe around the higher ground.
Changes in mud flat invertebrates
6.1    Distribution of intertidal invertebrates
Intertidal invertebrates usually occur in more or less
distinct zones down the beach and within estuaries,
although they can all live permanently submerged in
areas such as the Baltic Sea, so tidal innundation, as
such, is not important for most species. It does,
however, determine the time available for filter feeders
to feed and can, therefore, influence their growth and
survival. The distribution of most species is probably
determined by a combination of several factors, includ
ing the grain size of the sediment, organic content,
salinity and exposure. Anderson (1972), Smyth ef al.
(1974), Kay and Knights (1975) and Wolff (1973) have all
carried out multivariate analyses of invertebrate survey
data and these physical variables, for various estuaries,
and have described similar patterns,
Evans (1965) described a series of sediment zones'for
the Wash, some or all of which may be present at any
one site, from the top of the beach to the low water
mark.
(a)      Hydrobia ulvae, Nereis diversicolor and Coro
phium volutata form an 'upper mud flat' group.
Though few species are found in this zone, they
are often very abundant and the area is very
productive.
(b)     The fine silty 'upper sand flats' with Macoma
balthica.
(c)     The wellsorted, medium grade, 'Arenicola sand
flats'. In addition to the lugworm, cockle (Ceras
ioderma edule) beds are usually found in this
zone.
(d)     The 'lower mud flats' may contain such species as
the king ragworm (Nereis virens), or, in the
absence of this or other predators, the same
species found in the upper mud flats. Mussel
(Mytilus edulis) beds are also common in this
zone.
(e)     The 'lower sand flats' occur below the level of low
water of neap tides and consist of the coarsest
sand. The tube worm (Lanice conchilega) and the
bivalve mollusc Tellina tenuis are typical inhabi
tants. .
6.2   Changes on open coasts and large estuaries
With no sea walls or other barriers to the sea, it is
thought that the shore would move inland, retaining
more or less existing profiles and proportions of
different sediments. The rate of change may be impor
tant. Because, in general, the changes would be slow in
relation to the life cycles.of the invertebrates, the fauna
overall is unlikely to show any changes other than
'normal' population fluctuations.
However, eroding sediments usually have poor faunas
compared with areas of deposition, presumably
because the larvae have difficulties in settling. Also, at
points where there is high rapid erosion or a local
concentration of erosion, eg highlevel salt marsh
eroding to mud mounds and mud flats, there may be a
time lag between the effective loss of one habitat and
the establishment of another.
6.3    Changes in narrow protected estuaries
In estuaries and harbours protected from vigorous
wave action by narrow entrances, the dominant
sedimentary process is deposition. Fine particles,
eroded from open coast areas, are deposited on the
mud flats raising their level, so that lowlevel flats are
eventually replaced by highlevel flats. This process
would lead to an increase in such species as Hydrobia
ulvae and Nereis diversicolor at the expense of, for
example, Macoma balthica and Nephtys hombergii.
Unless the sediments are polluted, they should remain
rich productive areas until they reach a level at which
they are not covered by high water of neap tides, when
they would dry out, or they are colonized by plants and
become salt marsh. In either case, the fauna is reduced
and becomes seasonal.
Given an adequate supply of sediment, such areas
would ultimately become filled with salt marsh and the
only remaining mud flats would be the banks' of the
drainage creeks and channels. If the sediment supply is
insufficient to counter the soil settlement and compac
tion in the upper marsh and to maintain its level, then
the vegetation would die and there may be cycles of
erosion and deposition. In any case, it is expected that,
as the sea level rises, the entrance would eventually be
widened by erosion or the protective bar overtopped.
The estuary would then become open and erosion
would be the dominant process.
6.4    Present sea walls raised
Where there'are sea walls, it is expected that a rise in
sea level would lead to a number of changes with
consequences for the intertidal fauna. The beaches
would become narrower, which would lead to a reduc
tion in the absolute abundance of invertebrates, as the
area of ground that species can occupy between the
vertical limits would be reduced.
With the effective lowering of the beaches, salt
marshes, with their mixture of marine and terrestrial
faunas, would be eroded and eventually lost (Section
5.4). The same would be true for the upper mud flats.
Species which prefer lower beach levels would be
favoured, but in several species, eg Arenicola marina
and Macoma balthica. the larvae settle in siltier
sediments at a higher beach level than the adults
occupy. The loss of the upper mud flats could,
therefore, adversely affect these species. The general
lowering of the beach levels might cause a downshore
shift in the population of some species with a wide
range, eg cockles (Cerastoderma edule), resulting in a
proportional decrease in exposure time to bird pre
dation, but increased time for feeding, so that individ
uals would grow bigger and/or fatter. This effect would
be counteracted by the effect of changes in the nature
of the sediments.
As the proportion of fine particles in the sediment is
reduced by erosion, there would be a corresponding
reduction in the organic matter content of the sediment
(Wolff 1973). This decrease would lead, in turn, to a
reduction in the productivity of depositfeeding inverte
brates, eg Arenicola marina (Longbottom 1970).
As the reduction in fine particles and organic matter
proceeds, suspension feeders would become more
important, with the decline of the deposit feeders.
However, as the concentration of silt and clay particles
continues to rise, animals would stop feeding before
their filtration mechanisms become blocked (Widdows,
Fieth & Worrall 1979), resulting in poor growth or an
absence of suspension feeders, as in the Severn
estuary.
A high sediment" load also severely restricts light
penetration into the water and reduces the phytoplank
ton production; again, the Severn is the classic
example. This would not only severely restrict the
growth of suspension feeders, but would probably also
lead to a'more general reduction of productivity in
inshore waters.
If there is a gradual change from muddier to sandier
sediments, then there might be several changes of
species, for example:
In the Wash, the building of a sea wall around part of the
marsh has been quickly followed by an extension of the
remaining marsh and the upper mud flats, as muddy
sediments are deposited over the upper and/or Areni
cola sand flats. If, when erosion occurs, this layer is
simply stripped off the underlying sand, then it may be
recolonized quickly by adult migration from lower levels
or by larval recruitment.
However, fine sand particles are the most easily moved
by water currents. Coarser sands are made of heavier
particles, and finegrained silt and clay sediments are
cohesive, requiring stronger currents to erode and
move them into suspension. It seems likely, therefore,
that any water current or wave, with sufficient velocity
or force to exceed the threshold value and erode the silt
and clay particles, would also remove the fine sand
particles. The result could be not a gradual change of
sediment grade and of the animals living in it, but a rapid
jump from fine clay and silt to medium/coarse sand, and
consequently a much greater disturbance to, and
change in, the fauna.
As a result of erosion, the surface of the sediment
becomes increasingly covered in 'lag deposits' (shells,
stones, etc). If sufficiently deep, this layer may give
some measure of protection to the underlying fine
sediments and slow down the process of erosion. Such
areas may have good populations of shellfish and
worms, but often only a limited number of species.
Sediments consisting only of coarse particles, whether
they are sand, shells or stones, have very poor faunas,
because of the grinding action of the particles when
moved by waves and currents.
Ultimately, if continued, erosion would leave only a hard
clay base or the bed rock. The former supports only a
few burrowing animals, eg piddocks (Pholas dactylus),
and the latter would probably only develop a poor rocky
shore fauna, because of periodic inundation by mobile
sediments and 'sand blasting'.
Taken to its conclusion, open coasts would have only
coarse unproductive sediments or hard substrates. A
greater proportion of estuaries would also become
marine and sandy, and the brackish section, with its
very productive mud flats, would be reduced in area and
located further inland and upriver.
The situation in the sheltered estuaries would initially
be very different. Eroded sediments from open areas
would be redeposited, extending and raising the mud
flats and salt marshes. However, this process would
only continue as long as the sediment supply was
adequate. As the high rates of sedimentation decrease,
there would first be cycles of erosion and deposition,
and then erosion would become the dominant process,
as on the open coasts.
6.5    New sea walls constructed landwards
If the new sea walls were constructed sufficiently far
inland, the shore would simply migrate landwards, and
the habitats would remain as at present. However,
there could be complications to this process, as
discussed in Sections 6.2 and 6.3. If the sea walls are
rebuilt not as far inland, then the situation would be
intermediate between the former situation and that
described in Section 6.4.
6.6    Storm surge barriers built across estuaries
These barriers are operated in such a way that the tidal
range is reduced. They also provide protection from
waves. The combined effect produces a more shel
tered, lower energy, system in which the accretion of
fine particles can occur. Similar conditions are found in
such areas as Poole Harbour, where, in addition to the
usual mud flat species, there are a number of species
only found in more sheltered areas, eg a number of
species of the bivalve mollusc Abra and many species
of sedentary tube worms. There is the danger,
however, in these areas that organic enrichment will
lead to a fauna dominated by small opportunist worms,
or that green algal mats will develop causing anaerobic
conditions at the sediment surface which will kill the
infauna. Given an adequate supply of sediment, these
areas would proceed as described in Section 6.3. They
would eventually be dominated by salt marsh, pro
tected behind the barrier.
6.7  Impermeable barriers built across estuaries
The survival of any of the marine invertebrates would
depend on the maintenance of a sufficiently high
salinity. Brackish lakes would retain some of the typical
marine species, but with much reduced populations. A
further decrease in salinity would cause the progressive
loss of marine species, and allow their replacement by
their fresh water counterparts. The processes involved
have been well documented by studies on the brackish
and fresh water lakes created bythe Dutch Delta Works
(Saeijs 1982).
6.8    Abandonment of coast
This option would result in the movement of the
present zones landwards, the classic transgression
described in Sections 4.6 and 5.8. The effect on the
invertebrate populations has been outlined in Sections
6.2 and 6.3.
Changes in bird populations
7.1    Birds of salt marshes
A number of species nest in salt marshes, including
waders (notably redshank (Tringa totanus), oyster
catcher (Haematopus ostralegus), lapwing (Vanellus
vanellus), ringed plover (Charadrius hiaticula), and,
occasionally in northern Britain, curlew (Numenius
arquata) and dunlin (Calidris alpina), gulls (notably the
blackheaded gull (Larus ridibundus)), some terns (such
as the common tern (Sterna hirundo)), wildfowl (eg
mallard (Anasplatyrhynchos)and the shelduck (Tadorna
tadorna)), and a number of passerines (eg skylark
(Alauda arvensis), reed bunting (Emberiza schoeniclus)
and meadow pipit (Anthus pratensis)).
Amongst all these species, salt marshes are generally
regarded as being the most important for the redshank,
which, in a recent survey of the breeding birds of the
British marshes (Cadbury, Green & Allport 1987), was
found to nest at considerably higher densities than
those found in any of the inland breeding sites of this
species. The same survey revealed that the redshank
occurred at the highest densities in marshes with the
greatest variety of salt marsh plants. This finding
probably reflects a preference for those marshes with a
large range in height because, like all salt marsh species
that nest on the ground, the nests are vulnerable to
flooding at high spring tides (Hale 1980). The birds nest
in the middle and upper levels of the marsh to reduce
the risk of their nests being inundated. The survey also
showed that, whereas latitude had no effect on breed
ing density, redshank densities were higher in the east
of the country than in the west. This factor was perhaps
associated with the level of grazing on the different
marshes; redshank densities were highest on marshes
subjected to a medium level of grazing.
The total number of redshank nesting in Britain's 3820
ha of salt marsh was calculated as 17 500 pairs, some
60% of the 30 00034 000 pairs estimated to breed in
Britain (Cadbury et al. 1987). Of those nesting on salt
marsh, approximately 50% nested in East Anglia,
where onethird of Britain's salt marshes occur. The salt
marshes in northwest Britain were the next most
important.
Some waders feed in the marsh creeks and muddy
patches, notably the redshank and grey plover (Pluvialis
squatarola). Many wildfowl graze in the marsh, notably
the brent goose (Branta bernicla) and the wigeon (Anas
penelope). These birds tend to forage in the grazed
areas. Several passerines also forage in the salt marsh,
and for the twite (Acanthis flavirostris) salt marsh is its
main habitat. According to the study by Davies (1987)
on the Wash, reed buntings preferred the coarser
vegetation communities at the higher levels of the
marsh, whereas rock pipits (Anthus spinoletta) and
skylarks were widely scattered. The twites were found
primarily in the marsh samphire and sea aster zones at
the lower levels of the marsh.
7.2    Birds of mud flats
Many bird species exploit the invertebrates that live in
and on the intertidal sediments. They include a number
of species of wildfowl (notably the shelduck and the
eider duck (Somateria mollissima)), several species of
gulls (notably the blackheaded gull) and about 20
species of wading birds. Concern focuses most on
those species for which estuaries are the main source
of food, and these include the shelduck and most
waders. Although some of these species breed in the
vicinity of the British shoreline in the summer, most of
them occur in their greatest numbers outside the
breeding season. Large numbers are present on migra
tion between their breeding and wintering grounds
during late summer, autumn and in the spring. In
addition, many of them spend either the whole winter
on the British shore or go there when severe conditions
further to the north and east drive them from their main
wintering areas, such as the Waddenzee. It has been
estimated that British estuaries act as a wintering area
for more than onehalf of Europe's waders (Hale 1980).
Some wildfowl (notably the brent goose and wigeon)
also feed in winter on the vegetation, macroalgae and
seagrass, living on the surface of the intertidal flats.
Whether carnivorous or herbivorous, the abundance of
the food supply varies both along and down the shore.
The particle size distribution, stability, exposure time
and organic content of the sediments are all thought to
affect the abundance of these food organisms (Section
6.1).
Therefore, the water level on the shore affects the
abundance of the various food organisms available,
which, in turn, affects where the birds feed. There are
wellestablished relationships, at various levels of
scale, relating bird density to food abundance (Goss
Custard 1985).
There is increasing evidence that competition between
birds limits the numbers that can use a particular
estuary, or part of it (GossCustard 1985). As bird
density increases, the various forms of interference
that occur between birds as they forage become more
intense, and the rate at which the prey is depleted also
increases. The combined effect is that feeding condi
tions deteriorate as bird numbers rise. In herbivorous
wildfowl, the birds regularly eat out their food supply in
parts of their winter range and have to move on to other
sources. In carnivorous waders and ducks, the birds are
usually more dispersed and the rate of depletion of their
food supply is less rapid (GossCustard & Charman
1976). Nevertheless, evidence from several species of
waders suggests that, through interference, a given
abundance of food can only carry a certain density of
birds, and, for some species, many estuaries are
already at capacity (GossCustard & Moser 1988;
Moser 1988).
Food abundance is thought to interact with the time
available for feeding to determine the numbers of birds
that can be supported by a particular intertidal flat. The
birds are only able to feed at low water, so the exposure
time of the flat affects how long they can forage. When
the feeding time is reduced because the upper levels of
the beach have been removed by the spread of hybrid
cordgrass (GossCustard & Moser 1988) or by recla
mation for industrial purposes (Evans 1981), the
numbers of some sensitive species (notably the dunlin)
have decreased sharply in some estuaries.
Another factor thought to affect the number of birds
using an intertidal flat for feeding is the width of the
shore. Perhaps because many avian predators attack
from the direction of the shore (Whitfield 1985), some
waders seem to avoid narrow shores (Bryant 1979).
Many wildfowl also avoid narrow shores, presumably
because of the greater risk of disturbance from people.
7.3    Birds of inshore waters
A number of birds use the shallow inshore waters as
fishing grounds during both the breeding and non
breeding season. Several species of terns, for example,
breed around the British coast, and feed on small fish
often taken quite close to the shore. Sawbilled ducks,
such as the redbreasted merganser (Mergus senator),
cormorants (Phalacrocorax carbo) and shags (P.
aristotelis) all catch fish in inshore coastal waters.
7.4    Present sea walls raised
Even a rise in sea level of 0.8 m would result in the
present upper marsh (GSM) changing to lower marsh.
As this area is frequently inundated by the tide, it would
be unsuitable for breeding birds. It is, therefore, likely
that over 50% of the British breeding redshank would
no longer be able to breed successfully on the salt
marshes, especially as such a high proportion breed in
the vulnerable southeast of England. With the drainage
of inland wetland sites so far advanced, it is unlikely that
the redshank would be able to find alternative breeding
sites in Britain. The other species breeding on marshes
would be much less affected, as rather small numbers
are involved.
The birds feeding on the vegetation of the upper marsh
would certainly be affected, especially the grazing
wildfowl, such as the brent goose. The birds that feed
on the vegetation of the lower marsh would be less
affected, and might benefit from extra habitat resulting
from the 0.8 m sea level rise. The higher sea level rises
would seriously affect all marshfeeding birds.
The changes in nature of the intertidal flats, anticipated
here, would be disadvantageous for most of the birds.
First, the abundance of many of the food organisms
would be reduced because of the unfavourable change
in the nature and stability of the sediments, the greater
turbidity of the water (which is disadvantageous for
plants, phytoplankton and suspensionfeeding inverte
brates), and the reduced productivity of inshore waters
as a whole (Section 6.4). Second, the reduced width,
and therefore area, of the shore would force birds to
feed at higher densities, with a consequent increase in
competition between them. Third, the reduced expo
sure time following the degradation of the flats would
remove some of the time available for feeding. Finally,
the narrower shores might increase the rates of pre
dation on and disturbance to some vulnerable species.
Because waders are already thought to be dying from
food shortage (GossCustard 1985). either through
starvation or indirectly because hungry birds are easier
for predators to catch, a further reduction in the quality
of their feeding conditions would probably lead to a
decrease in population size (GossCustard 1980).
However, there are a few species for which the
predicted changes could bring an increased food
supply. The turnstone (Arenaria interpres) is the most
likely species to benefit, because harder and coarser
substrates, with the associated algae, provide places in
which their prey can live.
The increased turbidity of the water would make it more
difficult for the birds to catch fish in the inshore areas.
Furthermore, the fish stocks themselves might be
reduced by the increased turbidity and the stronger
wave attack, which could directly affect the fish them
selves or indirectly their food organisms.
7.5    New sea walls constructed landwards
So long as the new walls were constructed sufficiently
far inland for new marshes to form (Sections 4.3 & 5.5),
there should be no adverse effects on the populations
of birds that breed or feed in the salt marshes or mud
flats. The increased turbidity of inshore waters might,
however, affect the birds feeding there, as described
above (Section 7.4).
7.6    Storm surge barriers built across estuaries
The building of storm surge barriers could result in the
development of extra salt marsh at the expense of mud
flats (Sections 4.4 & 5.6), and this development could
provide extra habitat for the birds that breed or feed in
salt marshes. Clearly, however, much would depend on
the kind of marsh that developed.
The birds feeding on mud flats would find it more
difficult to collect sufficient food, because the reduced
space would.increase competition and there would be
less time to feed. On the other hand, the finer and more
stable deposits might increase the densities of some
invertebrates, especially the suspension feeders. Pre
dicting the net effect of these contradictory changes is
difficult at present, but is being attempted in connection
with the Severn barrage proposals.
The inshore waters inside the barrier would be
expected to be less turbid and calmer, which should
benefit the fisheating birds. The waters outside the
barrier might be deeper and more turbid than at
present, so, if these areas are used, feeding might be
more difficult in the vicinity of the barrier itself.
7.7    Impermeable barriers built across estuaries
With the loss of salt marshes (Sections 4.5 & 5.7), the
birds that breed there at present would have to find
alternative areas. Whether or not they do so would
depend on the nature of the habitats within the barrier.
These areas could be quite suitable for redshank
breeding, but much would depend on the kind and
extent of vegetation available, which, in turn, depends
on the drainage and grazing regime. Most of the birds
presently feeding in the salt marsh might be able to find
food in these new habitats. The exception would be the
twite; it is unlikely to find alternative feeding grounds.
The loss of the intertidal zone would remove the main
food supplies of the birds feeding there at present. Few
of them are likely to find alternative supplies inside the
newly created habitats within the barriers. Wildfowl
may be less affected than the waders. The removal of
salt water within the barrier would also remove the
species presently eaten by the birds feeding in shallow
estuarine waters, and their success in adapting would
depend on their ability to locate new sources of food.
7.8    Abandonment of coast
The effects on the bird populations are likely to be
essentially as described in Section 7.5, which con
sidered the effect of rebuilding sea walls further inland.
There are likely to be some changes, at least on the local
scale, but dramatic major effects are less likely.
Changes in sandy beaches, sand dunes and shingle
beaches
8.1     Introduction
The principle of transgression that was applied to
marshes and flats (Section 4.6) also applies, in general
terms, to sandy beaches, sand dunes and shingle
banks. The same qualification, namely the freedom of
natural movement, also applies. In many cases, and for
a variety of reasons, free natural movement cannot be
permitted. There is the added question of the supply of
material. Sites at present in active growth with an
abundant supply of sand or shingle are much more likely
to survive relatively unchanged than sites where there
is a limited supply of new material. Most sand and
shingle areas of conservation or amenity interest are at
present either unprotected or only partially protected
from natural marine erosion. It is unlikely that the
measure of protection given can be increased very
much except in special circumstances. Such a circum
stance might be when the feature plays a major role in
sea defence, eg where a lowlying coast is fronted by a
line of high dunes, or where vital structures, eg a
nuclear power station, would otherwise be threatened.
Consideration will be given to each habitat type, rather
than under the various sea defence options as in
previous Sections.
8.2    Sandy beaches
The critical factors here are the supply of sand and the
freedom of movement of the feature. For a beach
backed by a sea wall, the rising sea level and the
deepening water would increase erosion, resulting in a
lowering of the beach. Not only would an important
amenity be lost, but the stability of the sea wall itself
would be threatened. Most bathing beaches are backed
by a sea wall, and these beaches would be greatly
reduced in area by sea level rise. Highlevel beaches
would become lower level, and the characteristic
strandline floras and faunas would be lost completely.
Where the beach is on an unprotected coast, the
present beach would be eroded, but it is likely to be
redeposited further inland, as described previously for
salt marshes and mud flats. The net effects, in the long
term, are likely to be quite small, as most of the
organisms associated with the mobile habitats pro
vided by sandy beaches could withstand the likely rates
of change. However, there would be increased recre
ational pressure on such beaches because of the losses
of amenity beaches protected by a sea wall as
described above.
8.3    Sand dunes
Because of the wide range of types of sand formations
that occur in the British Isles, it is difficult to generalize
on the effects of sea level rise on sand dune habitats.
Initially, there would be erosion, or increased erosion, of
the seaward dune ridges. The sand released by this
process, together with any sand reserves in the
system, would then be available for new dune building
along a line further landwards. The extent of this
landward migration would depend on the sand supply
offshore, the sand supply mobilized by dune erosion,
the strength and direction of the prevailing winds, and
the general physiography of the site. Many of the larger
dune sites are likely to survive relatively unchanged,
except for the loss of the coastal strip, the subsequent
regeneration of primary dune communities, and some
overall increase in dune mobility.
In some cases, such losses that occur may be offset by
a beneficial effect of sea level rise. Sand dune systems
have an underlying layer of fresh water floating on the
sea water beneath. Many of the characteristic sand
dune plant communities are restricted to areas where
this fresh water layer is at or near the surface, the
socalled dune slack communities (Boorman 1977,
1988). These communities are dynamic and are vul
nerable to change. They can be lost by the accretion of
extra sand, effectively lowering the water table, or they
can be lost through a direct fall in the water table as a
result of water extraction for the growth of trees, or by
drainage of adjoining land used for agriculture or
forestry. A major rise in sea level would cause a
corresponding rise in the fresh water table, with the
regeneration of dune slack communities.
While the relatively favourable possibilities above
would apply to the small number of really large dune
sites, there are very many important small dune sites
where the natural adjustment would not, or could not,
be allowed to take place. This situation would apply
both to sites reduced in size by residential or industrial
development, and to sites limited in size by natural
features, such as cliff foot sites. For many of these
sites, a rise in sea level of the magnitude predicted
could cause major losses of habitat that would in no
way be offset by the favourable changes outlined
above. However, the integration of the requirements of
dune reinforcement for sea defence and for dune
ecosystem management can help considerably to
reduce undesirable changes (de Jong & Visser 1983).
8.4   Shingle beaches
The same general principles regarding the necessity of
space for freedom of movement, if natural compensa
tory processes are to be effective, apply also to shingle
beaches. There are a few large shingle structures
where transgressional adjustment could compensate
for sea level rise, with little overall change. At
Dungeness, a rise in sea level would further increase
erosion along the south shore, but this would be
compensated for by increased deposition along the
east shore with little overall loss in conservation value.
The process would probably not be allowed to take
place, however, because of the nuclear power stations
close to the south shore. Other constraints apply to the
various other shingle areas that are adjacent to residen
tial or commercial developments.
Shingle spits such as Orfordness have a long history of
cyclical changes, periods of building alternating with
periods of erosion, and a major rise in sea level would
reinforce present erosive tendencies. If there are
artificial restraints to the natural processes, necessary
sea defence works would affect the biological and
physiographic interest of the site, in addition to the
expense involved in protecting these formations as
they stand.
The changes in water table described for sand dunes
would also apply to the larger shingle beaches. It is
difficult to predict the magnitude of the effect. A small
increase is likely to be favourable, restoring water levels
reduced by water abstraction, but larger increases
could lead to the creation of extra fresh or brackish
water habitats, at the expense of terrestrial habitats.
The relatively narrow shingle beaches found especially
on highenergy coasts in the west and north should
survive relatively unchanged, except for some steepen
ing and landwards movement. The associated flora of
these storm beaches should be able to withstand the
changes.
Changes in earth cliffs
9.1  Direct effects
The major areas of earth cliffs, such as those in Norfolk
and north Humberside, are already subject to major
erosive losses. The postulated rises in sea level would
increase the depth of water offshore; larger waves
would be able to reach the cliff foot, with a consequent
increase in the rates of erosion. The biological effects
would be quite small, but the social implications of a
further increase in the rates of erosion would be
considerable.
9.2 Indirect consequences
If the increased erosion of the earth cliffs was permitted
to occur unchecked, the areas receiving the sediment
removed from the cliffs would benefit considerably.
The sediment made available would enable natural
processes to compensate for rises in sea level. If,
however, the losses along the cliff coast were halted or
reduced by coastal protection measures, the conse
quences for the former receiving areas would be
enormous, with major losses of habitat, to say nothing
of the sea defence problems created.
Changes in the paramaritime zone
The paramaritime zone can be defined as the area
landwards of the coast itself, where there is still a
discernible maritime influence on the natural fauna and
flora. The width of this zone depends on the lie of the
land and on the strength of the onshore winds. Along
the exposed coasts of the north and west, an increase
in the maritime influence would be limited by high
ground, although the combined effect of a higher sea
level coupled with stormier conditions could considera
bly extend this paramaritime zone. In the lowlying
areas of the southeast a rise in sea level could
significantly increase the landwards penetration of the
marine and maritime influence in several different
ways.
The rivers of Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire are
already at capacity and flood more or less regularly at
certain times of the year. With the combination of an
anticipated 20% increase in rainfall and the predicted
rise in sea level, there is likely to be a major increase in
the extent and frequency of such flooding. The bio
logical effects would depend on the water manage
ment policies adopted. Present 'wash lands', that are
flooded by the storage of excess water in the winter but
used extensively by breeding birds in the summer,
could be lost as a result of near permanent flooding, but
they might be replaced by the incorporation of new
areas similarly used for the storage of excess water in
the winter.
In addition to the increased threat of flooding, the East
Anglian rivers would also experience more frequently,
and to a greater extent, the salt penetration that caused
the major fish kill in Broadland last year. Such an event,
previously experienced only a few times in a hundred
years, might become a more or less regular occurrence.
As a result, long stretches of the rivers and most of the
Broads would become increasingly brackish, with cor
responding effects on the flora and fauna. The penetra
tion of sea water inland through permeable sands and
gravels, already experienced on a limited scale in east
Norfolk, would increase further.
In the event of new sea defence and coast protection
strategies, such as the building of major barrages or
tidal flood barriers, changes to the environment and
natural habitats could extend many miles inland.
Distribution of changes in the United Kingdom
All parts of the British Isles would experience some
effect from a change in sea level of the magnitude
predicted. The largest changes would, however, be in
the south and east, particularly from the Humber to
Poole Habour, and in other major estuaries such as the
Severn, the Mersey, Morecambe Bay and the Solway
(Figure 1). The various sites of amenity or conservation
interest are all interrelated. Changes in one site would
have its effects on other sites; studies made in one area
would be significant for others. Many, if not most, of the
bird species move, more or less freely, between the
various areas in Britain, as well as those of nearby
mainland Europe. It is clear that all the studies in the
British Isles should be coordinated and, moreover,
close links should be established with studies on the
corresponding, and interrelated, changes that would
take place on the other side of the North Sea, in the
Netherlands, and in France, Belgium and Germany. The
changes experienced in the Netherlands, following the
building of the Delta Works," will provide vital back
ground information in preparation for the changes likely
to be experienced during the coming decades.
Socioeconomic considerations
There are already many conflicting demands on our
coastal resources. These demands include the needs of
sea defence, industrial developments, amenity and
recreation, and nature conservation. All of these uses
will be brought into further conflict as a result of the
changes caused by rising sea level.
Along undefended coasts, the natural compensatory
movements of coastal deposits and their associated
ecosystems will bring about new conflicts of land use.
Along shorelines protected by sea walls, present con
flicts will be greatly increased as the coastal zones are
narrowed or destroyed. New sea defence options will
each have their own environmental problems. Relo
cation of the sea wall landwards will invariably cause a
range of socioeconomic problems, as this develop
ment will affect not only agricultural land but also
homes or even whole communities. The building of
major estuarine barriers, as well as being very expen
sive, will create new habitats, but also new problems.
However, there are yet further complications. The rise
in sea level is only one of the consequences of a global
climatic warming. It is predicted that much of England
will experience a climate closer to that of southwest
France today. The more favourable climate will certainly
encourage all forms of coastal recreation. These extra
demands will be particularly difficult to meet at a time
when decreasing coastal resources will come under
increasing pressures from all sides.
The best that we can do is, first, to predict as accurately
as possible the likely changes, and then to formulate
integrated plans to ensure the optimum use of our
coastal resources, including the design of new tech
niques for integrated management.
Research requirements
The following is a general outline of the areas of study
that would be necessary for a detailed assessment of
the effects of sea level rise on the fauna and flora and
for the formulation of appropriate techniques to mini
mize the impact of such effects. Some of the details
would be affected by the choices of sea defence
strategy, but broad outlines are indicated.
The research proposals are grouped, under each gen
eral subject heading, into four categories (AD) based
on their relative urgency. First, there are the primary
projects, category A, concerned with providing the
background information needed to forecast, in detail,
the changes caused by specific rises in sea level.
Second come the projects, category B, concerned with
the forecasting and interpretation of the consequences
of such changes. Third are the category C projects
concerned with the implication of specific sea defence
schemes and the associated problems of coastal zone
management. Finally, there are the longterm, category
D, projects associated with the ecological monitoring
and coastal zone management that will be required as
the rises actually occur.
The first two categories are for immediate considera
tion, but category A will partly depend on results from
category B and thus could well begin 24 years after the
initial start. The timing of category C projects would
depend on the formulation of specific sea defence
policies, with research funding needed in the,510 year
period. The need for category D projects would be
greatest in the 1015 year period.
12.1   Research on physical processes
CATEGORY A
Studies on the effect of predicted sea level rises on
beach processes, sediment sorting and transport, and
on patterns of erosion and accretion, especially in the
most vulnerable coastal areas of mud flats, salt
marshes, shingle banks and sand dunes.
CATEGORY C
Model studies on changes irferosion and deposition,
and the effect on sediment transport in, and between,
the various estuaries under the different sea defence
options in particular areas.
12.2  Salt marsh research
CATEGORY A
Studies on the tidal requirements of the various salt
marsh plant communities and their ability to respond to
changing conditions.
Surveys of the distribution of salt marsh plant species
and plant communities to determine the magnitude and
nature of the changes consequent on predicted sea
level rises.
CATEGORY B
Studies on changes in the ability of salt marsh plant
species to stabilize and hold marsh sediments under
unfavourable conditions.
Studies on the effect of sediment type, including the
effect of pollutants, on the establishment and growth of
salt marsh plants.
Studies on techniques for the rapid reestablishment of
salt marsh plant species on new areas of mud flats and
management techniques for achieving particular salt
marsh plant communities.
Studies on environmental factors, other than sea level,
that can affect salt marsh growth and development
adversely, including the effects of eutrophication and of
specific pollutants.
CATEGORY C
Studies on the changes in distribution of salt marsh
plants and plant communities consequent on the
reduction in tidal influence resulting from the construc
tion of tidal barriers.
CATEGORY D
Survey and monitoring of the changes in plant species
and plant communities consequent upon sea level rise.
12.3 Invertebrate research
CATEGORY A
Studies on the relationship between invertebrate bio
mass and productivity and beach width, beach level,
sediment type, and sediment organic content.
CATEGORY B
Studies on the relative importance of pelagic and
benthic microorganisms and organic matter as food for
different intertidal invertebrates, including experimen
tal studies comparing different estuaries with different
sediment loads.
Studies on the development of faunas in relation to
changes in habitat and sediment type, including the
effect of pollutants.
CATEGORY C
Studies on the effect of shelter and exposure on the
species composition and biomass of intertidal faunas,
with special reference to the creation and management
of replacement habitats for wading birds and wildfowl.
CATEGORY D
Survey and monitoring of the changes in biomass and
productivity of invertebrates consequent upon sea level
rise.
12.4 Bird research
CATEGORY A
Studies on the distribution of birds that breed on salt
marshes, particularly the redshank, and their breeding
success, at different levels of the marsh. The objective
would be to calculate the proportion of nests that would
be at risk from sea level rises of different degrees.
Studies on birds feeding on salt marshes in relation to
level and vegetation type, to identify those species
most vulnerable to changes in the salt marshes.
CATEGORY B
A survey of eroding and noneroding coasts in the
southeast of England in order to develop a model
relating the numbers of birds using a shore to its width,
erosion status and sediment type. Such a model would
be used to predict how expected changes in these
variables might affect the numbers of each species
using a shore.
Studies on the importance of inshore coastal waters to
fisheating birds. The results could be used to predict
how bird numbers might be affected by predicted
changes in water depth, water turbidity and the nature
of bottom sediments.
CATEGORY C
Studies on the recolonization of flooded coastal mea
dows to determine the possibilities of creating new
habitat for birds displaced by losses of former marsh
areas.
Information review supplemented by ground surveys of
breeding and feeding habitats inland, but adjacent to
the coast, in order to establish the vegetation types that
might be most favoured by birds currently breeding or
feeding on the salt marsh.
Information review supplemented by ground surveys of
habitats inshore of coastal barriers in order to determine
their use by birds that normally feed on coastal flats and
in shallow inshore waters.
CATEGORY D
Survey and monitoring of coastal bird populations in
.relation  to  sea   level   rise  and  associated  habitat
changes.
12.5 Other research
CATEGORY A
Studies on the effects of sea level rise on sand dune
systems and sand dune habitats, including changing
erosion patterns, the regeneration of habitat, changes
in water tables, and the effects on dune flora and fauna.
Studies on the effect of sea level rise on the flora and
fauna of shingle deposits, especially in relation to
erosion patterns and water table changes.
CATEGORY B
Studies to assess the longterm effects of changes in
dune and shingle habitats, and to devise suitable
management techniques for minimizing the losses of
species and habitats.
Socioeconomic studies on the interaction between
ecological changes on the coast and the changing
pattern of recreational activities in the coastal zone.
CATEGORY C
Case studies of the ecological impacts of major sea
defence, industrial, recreational or other projects on
sandy beaches, sand dunes, and shingle banks.
CATEGORY D
Survey and monitoring of changes in sandy beach, sand
dune and shingle habitats, and of the changing patterns
in the use and exploitation of the coastal zone in relation
to the rising sea levels.
